# NCES Data Download Notebooks
This repository is home to two Jupyter Notebooks I created that download data from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). One does so for public schools, and the other for private schools. This was a personal project I worked on inspired by previous work I had been doing.

## Overview
This project was my first introduction to using Selenium, a web scraping tool. I initially attempted to accomplish this task using BeautifulSoup, but quickly found that it's limited in its function. I needed to be able to travel to other pages through the NCES directories for public and private schools, and BeautifulSoup was not necessarily capable of this. I had heard of Selenium before, and decided to see if it would be able to travel between pages through a simple Python script, which it was able to do. I ended up learning how to create a Selenium driver, change windows through links embedded in HTML, and setting up fallbacks for if a page failed to load.

## Inspiration
A task I was instructed to do for work was to collect and standardize data from NCES to update a database of school information. I had completed this task in a more manual fashion by going to each state through NCES and downloading the data from there, importing it into Google Sheets, and then creating scripts in the AppScripts extension with JavaScript to standardize and organize the information. After this task was completed, only then did I have the idea of seeing if it was possible to do all of this using Python. I started with the public schools notebook, which took me a couple of days to work through as I wanted to thourghouly test it. Afterwards, I was then able to complete the notebook for the private schools by making some simple tweaks to the public schools notebook.

## Potential Improvements
The main improvement I would make is to utilize multi-threading to make the process faster. In its current state, for both notebooks, it takes at least 30+ minutes to run. This was fine for me, since it was a personal project and I was not concerned with optimization at the time, but if I were to actually use this as part of a job, I would look into doing this. Smaller improvements I would implement include standardizing text columns further into title case (i.e. School Names, School Districts, Counties, etc.) and creating a cell to automate creating the download directories. There are also likely other optimization improvements I could make within the main loop if I were to sit down and look over what exists.
